it's really a very much a pleasure to
welcome Adam Hoch shield to a back tip
to P&P the
at least Adams six appearance in the
store the first was nearly two decades
ago and it seems the time between his
visits keeps getting shorter and shorter
between his initial talk here in 1990
and and his second there were nine years
that elapsed than six years that five
his last appearance here was just two
years ago so at this rate maybe we'll
see you again next year
Adam has a great job he just writes
books about whatever interests him and
they tend to interest lots of readers so
he gets to do more books his first jobs
were in journalism he reported for a
daily newspaper for a couple of years
and that was good training especially
for writing quickly then he spent nearly
a decade writing and editing magazines
including ramparts and and Mother Jones
which he helped establish he thought
he'd be a novelist but his first try it
that didn't go anywhere so in 1986 he
published a memoir half the way home
about his difficult relationship with
his dad and he's gone on since to
produce books that can be categorized
either as narrative histories or a
combination of history and journalism as
he's explained elsewhere Adam tends to
be drawn to times and places in the past
involving people wrestling with profound
political and moral dilemmas and and
feeling and imperative to confront evil
he's written about apartheid in South
Africa in the mirror at midnight
Stalin's prison camps in the unquiet
ghost the exploitive regime that king
leopold ii of belgium imposed on the
Congo in King Leopold's ghost efforts to
end slavery in the British Empire in
Barrie the chains resistance to the
madness of the First World War in to end
all wars and American volunteers and
journalists getting caught up in the
Spanish Civil War in Spain in our hearts
whatever era or issue Adam has
chosen to to focus on he's gone about
telling the story through a network of
connected compelling characters and his
interest in situations where people have
taken stands against despotism or unjust
Wars or institutional evils is rooted in
his own coming-of-age and activism
during the civil rights and anti-war
protests of the 1960s
his new book lessons from a dark time
and other essays is as the title
indicates a collection of pieces all
previously published as Adam makes clear
in the introduction the book is meant to
serve as a kind of response to the
threat of Donald the threat that Donald
Trump's presidency poses to our
democracy and to the resurgence of
authoritarianism elsewhere in the world
the essays a number of the essays are
reminders that that people have resisted
racism xenophobia and other and justices
in the past and one helping to transform
the world for the better and giving the
rest of us continued reason to hope so
ladies and gentlemen please join me in
welcoming Adam Hulk shield well thank
you Brad it's very nice to be here
I remember that first time I was here in
1990 what I remember about it was that
exactly six people came four of whom
were friends and relatives so the trend
is definitely upward which is good well
it's very nice to have a chance to talk
with you about my new book I started
thinking three or four years ago about
this book that it would be nice to pull
together some of the magazine pieces
that I've written over the years for The
New Yorker The New York Review of Books
Harper's Mother Jones and other other
magazines there would be fun to pull
them together polish them up a little
bit and put them in one volume but then
for the last two years I've felt as I'm
sure a lot of you here
have that we are living in a pretty grim
political moment and that affected to
some degree which articles I chose for
this volume and how I framed them
because to the extent I could I wanted
to choose as Brad said pieces that
offered some hope or reminded us that
we've been through grim times before and
asked what lessons we could learn from
them and that's often what I'm thinking
about when I write history now this
doesn't apply to all of the pieces in
the book because there are some stories
in it that I hope readers will enjoy
even if they don't directly apply to the
moment we're in but it certainly applies
to some of them so tonight I thought I
would just take you on a quick tour of a
couple of parts of the book which means
a tour of some of my interests and
obsessions not the full meal which would
be 26 courses because they're 26 pieces
in this book but a tasting menu of a few
of them so what are some of those
lessons what are some of the connections
between the times we're living in now
and parallel moments we can find in the
past I think sometimes when times seem
dark it is interesting to look back at
times that were even worse for instance
right now we have as I don't need to
tell you a president who demonizes
immigrants Mexicans are rapists is this
caravan of refugees who were approaching
the border they're now at the border
threatening everything we hold dear in
this country and so forth and we think
looking at this stuff on TV seeing it in
the newspapers this is a more naked and
disgusting xenophobia than we've seen in
the past well let me introduce you to
another president here is a quote from
him giving a speech to Congress this is
the quote there are citizens of the
United States I
blushed to admit born under other flags
who have poured the poison of disloyalty
into the very arteries of our national
life such creatures of passion
disloyalty and anarchy must be crushed
out the year 1915 the President Woodrow
Wilson now we have a president today who
calls the press the enemy of the
American people something that's echoed
by his underlings on all sides have we
been there before
we have been here's another quote there
are some newspapers published in this
city every day the editors of which
deserve conviction and execution for
treason the city that the speaker was
referring to was New York the year was
1917 the speaker was Elihu root at that
time
special envoy Woodrow Wilson former
Secretary of War Secretary of State
United States Senator now both of these
quotes come from a period of severe
repression that took place in the early
20th century period from the spring of
1917 through early 1920 it was provoked
by American entry into the first world
war and then by the Russian Revolution
paradoxically it took place under
President Wilson somebody who is best
remembered today for his
internationalist idealism for being the
backer of the League of Nations and so
forth and that time period which has
long fascinated me and I've returned to
it for a book I'm working on right now
is the subject of the title essay of
this book lessons from a dark time so
before I get to the lessons just to go
over some of the things that happened
during that period with quotations like
the one I just read to you Wilson paved
the way Shane lessly for hysteria
against immigrants but the
anti-immigrant crackdown that followed
pronouncements by him and other
was selective when the United States
entered the first world war for example
the government used that as an excuse to
arrest many Americans who were German
born but had never gotten or I shouldn't
say many people in this country who were
German born but who had never gotten
naturalized as US citizens even though
they'd lived here for many years but
those arrests were highly selective they
just happened to pick people who belong
to the Industrial Workers of the world
the IWW the country's most militant
labor union repression of black
Americans continued unabated in in this
era there were 60 black Americans
lynched in 1918 78 in 1919 under a
president who was an ardent
segregationist and who actually
tightened the amount of segregation in
the federal government but this period
was so repressive that it was not just
black people who got lynched a number of
whites as well
a IWW organizer in Butte Montana
Frank little was lynched for having
organized a strike of miners in protest
against an underground mining accident
that killed more than a hundred copper
miners in Collinsville Illinois a man
named Robert Prager who had the bad luck
to be german-born was attacked by a mob
wrapped in an American flag forced to
sing the star-spangled banner lynched
from a tree on the outskirts of town it
made no difference to people that he had
actually tried to enlist in the US Navy
but been turned down because he had a
glass eye 11 members of the lynch mob
were acquitted of all charges by a jury
while a military band played outside the
courthouse and it's no accident that the
same period saw an assault on the media
unmatched by anything we've really seen
in this country
here the excuse was the war and but the
target was always the left the
government's instrument was the post
office because newspapers and magazines
had to reach people through the mail
they passed a regulation that said and
I'm quoting anything calculated to cause
insubordination disloyalty mutiny or
otherwise embarrass or hamper the
government in conducting the war was
banned from the press altogether some 75
newspapers and magazines in this country
either had entire issues centered
blocked from the mail or were shut down
completely one of the magazines shut
down completely was really one of the
most interesting and lively magazines
this country has ever produced the
masses which published John read the
young Walter Lippman Sherwood Anderson
Edna st. Vincent Millay many other
people it was really The New Yorker of
its day one of the items that offended
the censors in the masses was a cartoon
of the Liberty Bell crumbling there was
a massive crackdown on the labor
movement radicals who spoke out against
the war against American participation
in the First World War were sent to jail
the Labour and socialist leader Eugene B
Debs spoke out very strongly against the
war after the United States had entered
it for this he was arrested tried
convicted sent to prison and he was
still in prison two years later November
of 1920 when he received nearly a
million votes for president on the
Socialist Party ticket campaigning from
his jail cell in the federal
penitentiary in Atlanta Emma Goldman the
anarchist leader sent to jail for two
years for organizing against the
mandatory draft when she was put on
trial and accused of being unpatriotic
she told the jury that her American
patriotism was like that of the man who
a woman with open eyes he is enchanted
by her beauty yet he sees her faults I
think that's a pretty good definition of
patriotism still today and also in this
era we saw something that there's been a
long nasty thread of throughout American
history which was vigilante justice
vigilantes broke into the office of a
piece group right across the street from
the White House smashed its furniture
threw things out the window they broke
into a Socialist Party office on the
Boston Common made a bonfire out of its
contents
there were vigilante groups that had
names like the Knights of Liberty and
the sedition Slammers the largest of
them was something called the American
Protective League which ended up with
250,000 members and was an official
auxiliary of the Department of Justice
and these folks even had the franking
privilege of sending mail for free you
know when you get a letter from your
member of Congress or a senator all it
requires is their signature same for the
American Protective League they made
citizens arrests they beat people up
they generated more than a million pages
of wildly unreliable accusations of
subversion so on that got turned over to
the government
they tarred and feathered people and the
period climaxed in late 1990 nerely 1920
and water known as the Palmer Raids
after the Attorney General at the time a
mitchell Palmer where they arrested
radicals of every stripe all over the
country altogether well over 5,000
people arrested in a single day January
2nd 1921 group of them were marched
through downtown Boston in Chains
May Day 1920 the Chicago police put
three hundred and sixty radicals in
preventive detention for the day because
it was said there was supposed to be a
communist uprising on May Day which
never happened
so what lessons can we draw from all
this I think one of them is that
sometimes a determined person in a
position of some influence can still
follow the law and have considerable
influence here's an example from that
period during this period of the Palmer
Raids a total of somewhere between 6,000
and 10,000 undocumented non-citizens
were arrested and attorney general
Palmer and his young assistant J Edgar
Hoover were extremely eager to deport
them but the Justice Department did not
control deportations
that was controlled by the Immigration
Bureau which fell under the Department
of Labor and there happened to be an
Assistant Secretary of Labor a man named
Louis F post former newspaperman who was
able to stop most deportations a real
hero of this grim era he cancelled
search warrants he restored habeas
corpus rights for people who were
detained drastically reduced or
eliminated bail for many of them this
earned him the undying hatred of Hoover
who unsuccessfully
orchestrated a campaign by the American
Legion to get post dismissed and when
that didn't work tried to get Congress
to impeach him but post was able to keep
his position and all told was able to
prevent some 3,000 people from being
deported now today a right-winger might
call this the deep state inaction but
whatever you call it I think it shows
that even in very dark times sometimes
our institutions still work and I have a
gut feeling that a lot of those
institutions are stronger today than
they were a hundred years ago I think
the next two years is going to tell us
whether that feeling is right or not
a second lesson I take from this era is
that we have to be wary in this country
of the way that tradition of vigilante
justice may surface we don't have
anything on the scale of the American
Protective League now and I find it hard
to imagine that happening but we have
seen a tremendous rise in the number of
private armed militias around the
country you know these are the people
you saw last year at Charlottesville and
their camouflage outfits carrying their
rifles in their boots and so on and
we've seen a lot of them in the West in
these standoffs over Western land
occupations 400 armed militia men on
hand at one in Nevada and 2014 300 and
Oregon and 2016 in a four year period
starting in 2010 there were more than 50
attacks on Bureau of Land Management or
Forest Service employees several of them
by snipers under Trump the number of
armed militia groups in the US has risen
the Southern Poverty Law Center tracks
this kind of thing very very closely
from 165 at the end of 2016 to 273 at
the end of 2017 so I think we have to
keep the our eye on these folks at least
for the moment they don't have the
sanction of the US Department of Justice
the last lesson I take from this period
is that if you have a president who
really wants to silence deport or jail
his critics the best thing he can have
is a war us entry into World War one was
the excuse for everything I'm talking
about I don't think it was the real
motive for it
there were a lot of bottled up tensions
in this country when the u.s. entered
the war but it was the excuse for it so
every time that President Trump talks
about making threatening gestures you
know towards China towards Iran
maybe towards North Korea again he and
Kim seemed to be falling out of love at
the moment keep a long-range eye on what
he is maybe thinking about doing under
cover of that war hysteria I want to
take one other example from this book an
example that involves taking lessons not
just from the past but from other places
and encouraging lessons there are a
couple of such pieces in the book and
here's what one of them is about a few
years ago I was invited to a book
festival in Finland and when I got there
the publisher who'd invited me showed me
the schedule of events for the week
and said look here you've got a free day
on your schedule on Thursday is there
anything you'd like us to arrange for
you we've got some beautiful medieval
churches you might want to see and I
said you know what I'd really like to
see is a prison and the reason for that
is that I knew that Finland had one of
the world's lowest incarceration rates
they locked people up at less than 10%
of the rate we do here in the United
States now obviously there are some
differences between the two countries
it's smaller it's colder but that can't
explain everything so I spent most of
the day in a medium-security prison
called Kerava the prisoners were all men
although interestingly the director of
the prison and most of the staff were
women the men were there for a variety
of offenses some of them violent
violating drug laws fraud embezzlement
burglary armed robbery the thing that
most struck me was that these prisoners
were all day long in classes language
classes vocational skills classes
computer skills a cooking class I had a
delicious meal
was prepared by the cooking close first
aid and when they complete a particular
class or a group of courses that
certifies them for something they get a
diploma that is from a national
education certification organization the
same thing that certifies to such
courses all around the country that
doesn't say you took this class in
prison it just says you are a licensed
computer technician or whatever the
skill is they had an organic farm inside
this this this prison and as the
director walked me through it she
explained how she felt that taking care
of small animals with something very
therapeutic and she could see its effect
on the prisoners they had a library
bigger than you would find in most
American high schools and if a prisoner
was looking for a book that he couldn't
find in the library he could get it
through the National interlibrary loan
system they had individual psychotherapy
they had group psychotherapy and
Alcoholics Anonymous groups a life
skills class that met three times a week
and something they were very proud of a
series of lectures by former inmates
from this prison who had been released
successfully readjusted to life in the
outside world and came back and talked
about how they how they did it before a
prisoner is released from care of a
prison a social worker from the prison
goes to the town that he's to be
released to and makes sure he has a safe
place to live and a job then he's
released imagine how different that is
from what we have in this country now I
don't need to fill in the details now
you can say you know our way of doing
things is so deeply embedded you will
never get you know you can have various
prison reform initiatives here but you
know the Nordic way of doing things and
our way of doing things are just so
different that there is no hope of our
ever having something
criminal justice system that looks like
this but here's where it's interesting
to look at the history because if you
roll back the clock almost 70 years to
the year 1950 in 1950 Finland locked
people up at a rate greater than we did
in the United States in 1950 and Finland
a hundred and eighty seven people out of
every hundred thousand were behind bars
as against only a hundred and seventy
five here and that's counting all those
prisoners on chain gangs in the American
South a long series of reforms in
Finland not without their hardline
opponents brought this rate of
incarceration way down just as our own
sword today we have six hundred and
fifty five people per hundred thousand
in prison in the United States compared
to fifty seven per 1000 in Finland so my
point is simply that a country can
change something that seems very basic
if it really wants to so these are a
couple of the topics I've covered in the
book some others I don't have time to go
into here but maybe if we have some time
for a little back-and-forth discussion
we can one piece is about a fascinating
figure in the world of intelligence whom
I call the father of American
surveillance several of the pieces are
about favorite authors of minds some of
them I'm sure familiar to you writers
like George Orwell and Mark Twain others
may not be writers like Sven Lindquist
and Victor Serge a couple of the
articles are about the experience of
living half a year in India the oldest
piece in the book from the Year 1994 is
about spending a day on the on the
campaign trail with Nelson Mandela when
he was running for president in South
Africa's first free election several of
the pieces are
more recently going back to Africa to
eastern Congo to see what that part of
the world looks like today some of you
may have read my book King Leopold's
ghost which is about the Congo of more
than a hundred years ago so those are
some of the other things in the book and
despite the grim times that we're in I
want to end on a more positive note by
reading you a very short piece that ends
the book and perhaps and it's it's an
appropriate thing to read because a
piece about books and perhaps it's an
appropriate thing to read here when
we're in a sort of wonderful temple of
books so let me just read you the piece
that ends the book here for the first
time some American school and college
students are being issued electronic
books instead of printed textbooks their
arrival feels to me not like
technological progress but like the
first notes of a death knell in a
society in which relatively few people
read books for pleasure to begin with
still fewer will do so if they do not
encounter books real books as students
there are many reasons to love the
old-fashioned paper book that promising
virginal crackle of the spine as you
open a new hardcover for the first time
the sense of accomplishment as you look
at the shelves of what you've read and
of humility as you look at the shelves
of what you haven't I've been feeling
sad about the imperiled state of printed
books for an additional reason
what books tell us about the person who
loves them in this way books give a
small measure of immortality not just to
writers but also to readers each year my
wife and I spend time and what was once
the summer home of her late parents and
the room where I work is lined with her
father's books he was a career foreign
service officer a staunch cold cold war
liberal and a man who believed that the
best of human virtues were
car nated in Puritan New England his
picture of the United States was far
rosier than mine but whatever the limits
of his worldview what strikes me now is
how much of it I can still see in the
books on his shelves on his shelves they
are a portrait of his mind there are
books about the various places where he
served as a diplomat Ghana New Zealand
Israel Tunisia for each time he was sent
to a new country he read up on it
enthusiastically looking for upbeat
parallels to the New England experience
there are books by the hundreds about
the United States for the most part
portraying it as a country where
everything works is wonderfully as the
founding fathers planned their titles
alone tell the tale this glorious burden
chance or destiny the first new nation
this is the challenge the discipline of
power
sometimes a slip of paper marks a
passage he especially liked some of his
books are from a phase when he read
biographies and memoirs of the famous no
dissidents no women but many presidents
great writers and Supreme Court justices
he was trying he once told me to figure
out what were the early life experiences
that made people into great men the
phrase he always pronounced as if both
words were capitalized other volumes
clearly represent less what he actually
read than what he would have liked to
have read for books also form portraits
of our unfulfilled ambitions an ancient
leather-bound set of Blackstone's
commentaries on the laws of England a
huge family Bible Gibbons decline and
fall of the Roman Empire and Emerson's
complete works none of them have the
creased spines of books that have been
frequently opened
finally there is his beloved collection
of books on New England including the
795 paged genealogical dictionary of
Maine and New Hampshire which I pull out
every summer to try to imagine the
mysterious controversy alluded to in its
preface this acknowledges the
contributions to the volume made by one
Charles Thornton Libby who quote acted
as a consultant and problems in which he
was known to have a personal interest
but his deep-seated conviction that the
book should not be published at all did
not make for an entirely happy situation
on 40
the point is this I can look around the
room and see a landscape of my
father-in-law's passions quirks and
beliefs his four grandchildren one born
after his death will be able to do this
for years to come
collections of books large and small
transcend time sometimes it is just a
shelf of books over a bed how many times
is a guest in someone else's house
staying in the room of a son or daughter
no longer at home have I looked through
a bookshelf for clues to the tastes and
dreams of the person who once slept here
such voyeurism is not a forbidden one
but one to be celebrated it's not just
the writing of books that expresses who
we are but also the freedom to collect
them to arrange them and to enjoy the
collections of others once a man was
visiting our house who had recently been
released from many years as a political
prisoner in Pakistan sitting in our
living room talking at one point he
paused jumped up and began running his
hands over the books on our shelves you
must excuse me he apologized I have not
been able to do this for years so thank
you
[Applause]
so I think we have a few minutes the
microphone right there yeah
so since the 2016 election looking for
optimism what signs of hope do you see
and what guidance do you have for us I
have all the answers yeah well the
biggest sign of hope I see is the 2018
election which I think had some very
encouraging results one of which is that
for the first time in many years the
percentage of Democrats in the House of
Representatives is actually slightly
higher than their percentage of the
popular vote which almost never used to
happen because of gerrymandering but
there is some mysterious way I don't
fully understand and which population
shifts have undone some of that and I
hope Court decisions will undo still
more of that I do think we have an
enormous problem of voter suppression in
this country and there were some steps
forward and some steps back on that in
this last election the big step forward
of course was in Florida where they you
know a popular referendum removed this
ban on former felons from voting and
they estimate that Allah enfranchise 1.4
million people not that all of them will
vote this is the other big problem we
have to do is to motivate people to turn
out and vote but I feel that whole
problem of voter suppression has been
put on the national agenda in a way that
it wasn't quite before and of course one
of the prime architects of death Kris
Kobach got were defeated in his race in
Kansas so these are some of the things I
feel encouraged by but we have a lot of
work still to do and I'm sure a lot of
you were out there you know working in
different congressional districts and
other parts of the country where your
efforts were needed last month and
before and more power to you and you're
gonna have to do it again in 2020 I'm in
the middle of your wonderful book bury
the chains I read King Leopold's ghost
and the thing I love about this book is
how you talk about Thomas Clarkson and
how amazingly help
he helped spur the effort to end the
triangle slave trade and how nobody
thought that could end because it was
such an economic boon just so many
empires so in this country I think we
need a similar Thomas Clarkson to go up
against the NRA and I was also looking
at this program last weekend by Fareed
Zakaria about gun control in this
country and one of the things they
talked about a sort of similar person
was the Australian Prime Minister I was
trying to google his name because I
can't remember which one who led the gun
control laws in Australia and ended up
you know people were threatening him he
had death threats and PPID wear a
bulletproof vest when he went around the
country advocating for gun control and
they showed bulldozers you know
bulldozing the guns that people handed
in it was really a wonderful wonderful
effort in Australia as a result no
longer has the mass shootings that
spurred it indeed so I think in this
country we need somebody that could be
like a Thomas Clarkson or or an
Australian Prime Minister I mean the gun
culture is so deep and so rooted here do
you think it's ever gonna be possible to
change that well I think it's not going
to be one person who magically magically
does it it's got to be a lot of people
the gun thing is a tough one they did do
it in Australia and I think very often
the reasons when sudden social change
happens and Australia passing these very
strict gun laws as one example and the
the book that you're reading buried the
chains which is about the
chandi slavery movement of the late
1700s early 1800s is another example
both of these and the anti-slavery
movement I know more about from having
lived with those folks while writing
this book both of these are examples I
think where the good folks got organized
before the other side did one of the
fascinating things for me about the
anti-slavery movement which took off in
such a dramatic way so suddenly in
England in the late 1780s is that the
slaveholder Lobby just didn't know what
hit them
slavery had been something that
everybody took for granted and had
always been there it seemed the Romans
had slaves the Greeks had slaves if we
didn't have slavery where would we get
the sugar for our tea there had been no
movement and then this extremely well
organized group of people got together
invented most of the tools that we use
for political organizing today from the
political poster to the logo to the very
idea of having a group agitating for
something in the national capital with
corresponding with committees in towns
and cities around the country this kind
of thing hadn't been done before and
they were able to pull it off we're
gonna have a harder time with guns in
this country because the NRA is so well
entrenched and they've got the whole gun
industry behind them but in the course
of writing about this and there's this
one piece in the book that does deal
with gun culture in America one of the
things I learned that I hadn't been so
aware of before is the tremendous
difference that there is between
different states in this country and the
degree to which they regulate guns and
correspondingly the degree to which the
number of
shootings tends to be somewhat less
there are tremendous differences among
the states which encouraged me to think
that we can move forward on that issue
in a kind of piecemeal fashion
there are also remarkable differences
three and fourfold differences between
American States and the the
incarceration rate Vermont and Rhode
Island lock people up at less than a you
know less than a quarter the rate that
they do in Louisiana or Mississippi so I
think there are things you know often by
starting at the state level that one can
accomplish something thank you you've
been remarkably successful at picking
topics that people want to read about
how do you go about selecting the topics
for your book well it has to be
something that obsesses me and that that
I find myself thinking about wondering
about and so for a long time and then
then the job is trying to take my
obsession and find a way of making it
interesting to somebody who doesn't
think they're obsessed with this thing
to begin with and for me that's all
about choosing characters through whom
to tell a story and I think of myself as
like a a film or a theatre director
having auditions except they're often
auditions for parts which have not yet
exactly been written but I'm out looking
for people I mean I'll take one book as
an example and some of you may have read
and I think I did talk about it here to
end all wars which is my book about the
the first world war I've long been
obsessed with the first world war I had
two uncles who fought in it my father
actually was a military age during the
First World War
wanted very much to
get into the u.s. army was bitterly
disappointed that he was turned down
because he had bad eyesight
my mother on the other hand had a cousin
she loved very much who was killed in
the first world war so I had oh there
was always a lot of talk about the war
and my family and the older I got the
more I read about it and the more
fascinated I got by this period and I
found there were two aspects of it that
fascinated me one was the utter
boneheaded stupidity of the generals on
both sides who day after day year after
year
ordered these poor young men to climb
out of their trenches and not run not
crawl but walk towards the enemy trench
so that they could be mowed down by the
millions by machine-gun fire how were
these men thinking because these were
their own sons they were sending and
into battle the other type of person
that had long fascinated me were the
resistors people like Eugene Debs and
Emma Goldman in this country Keir Hardie
and Bertrand Russell and in England
Georgia race in France who saw this war
as madness as it was happening or as it
was about to happen and who spoke out
against it loudly clearly often were
sent to jail as a result now my problem
was these were sort of twin obsessions
but I couldn't figure out how to get
these two very different types of people
into the same book and I read and read
and read and collected characters but
they just wouldn't come together and
then one day I was reading a very boring
lis written scholarly article about a
British pacifist named Charlotte
disbarred who was an ardent opponent of
the war staunch radical on every issue
of the day favored independence for
India independence for Ireland was
arrested four times in the battle for
women's suffrage and after the first
world war began she traveled up and down
England saying this was a terrible thing
and her speeches were often broken up
rock-throwing mobs she went to visit the
families of conscientious objectors who
were in prison and so on and in one
sentence in passing the writer of this
article said naturally mrs. Despard
activities were deeply upsetting to her
brother and it gave his name which i've
recognized as british commander in chief
on the western front so I've got my book
I then realized the way to do it was
telling a story through divided families
so I went looking for a couple of other
divided families also in England and
then the rule was that other characters
were admitted to the caste if they were
connected to one of these three divided
families and so but it's it's a search
it takes it takes a while and sometimes
someone a person or an event obsesses me
for a long time and it takes a long time
before I can figure out how to get that
obsession into book form but it has to
obsess me to start with so maybe that's
the answer to your question thank you
very much I especially like the feel
like I learned a lot from your several
minutes of describing the world war one
and post-war period and how how bad
things were there in terms of xenophobia
and other kind of similar I guess you
could say right-leaning
so I'm interested in looking further
what the parallels are and what any lack
of parallels are between the two and in
particular is there a central figure
from that time a central political
figure that in any sense would represent
the Donald Trump of today it doesn't
seem to me that Woodrow Wilson would do
it would fill that particularly as you
as you say you know there in addition to
the xenophobia there was in his case
League of Nations and a lot of sort of
idealistic thought about Nations getting
to getting along and so forth that
doesn't really sound like Donald Trump
so what politically what was what was
driving this was it simply partisan
warfare or was there one or two or three
central demagogues who were stoking this
you've met you've kind of alluded to a
few but well what was driving the
repression of that period again we're
talking about the 1917 1920 period
Wilson was a complicated figure because
he did preside over and stamped his
approval on a lot of that repression at
the same time there was a genuinely
idealistic streak and what he was trying
to do with the the League of Nations and
particularly in the first years of his
presidency and before he became
president he you know took some fairly
strong positions against unbridled
corporate power and so on he was never
somebody who had much use for immigrants
though and even if you look at his early
writing there's a book he wrote that
came out in 1902 when he was still a
professor at Princeton just before he
became President of Princeton where he
talks about how the good anglo-saxon
stock of this country is being brought
down by this terrible new wave of
immigrants from Eastern Europe and
southern Europe in other words Jews and
Italians so that was a that was a pretty
strong element of his thinking all along
I think there were a lot of many
demagogues many Trump's all through that
period one person in particular wealth
several people in array in and around
Wilson one was his attorney general a
mitchell Palmer who presided over these
so-called Palmer Raids where thousands
of radicals were
rounded-up Palmer had been
understandably jarred because anarchists
tried to blow up his house and didn't
the only person who got killed was one
of the anarchists he managed to blow
himself up but and I think that may have
made Palmer more militant than he had
been to start with J Edgar Hoover was
really his number 2 person during those
raids and Hoover certainly saw this kind
of crackdown as a way to make his own
career and throughout the rest of his
life in government Hoover was far more
interested in cracking down on
communists anarchists and other radicals
than he was on organized crime for
instance another one of the many Trump's
of that period was the Postmaster
General Sidney Albert Burleson the first
Texan to be in a cabinet whose father
had fought for the Confederacy and who
was the person who presided over this
crackdown on the media so you know there
were a lot of unsavory people there but
what strikes me most when I read about
this time is that and try to imagine
myself in it and there are actually some
things you can actually see some film
footage you know these Palmer Raids
policemen and federal agents barging
into houses and throwing people down
staircases and doing stuff like that
what strikes me is that there was the
and I fear that there always is but
there was a lot of it that was visible
then there is a kind of a lot of bottled
up nastiness in all of us that when
there's an excuse for it to come out and
there is no excuse like the country
going to war it comes out in these very
nasty ways
and you read the accounts of Wilson for
instance going to Congress to ask for a
declaration of war in the spring of 1917
there were some brave dissenters there
were six senators who voted against the
declaration of war one of them was the
great progressive Robert La Follette who
stood there on the Senate floor chewing
gum with his arms crossed like this when
Wilson was giving a his speech and he
began receiving nooses in the mail but
you you read the accounts of other
members of Congress and there were
people with tears of joy streaming down
their faces the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court cannot remember who that
was at that one of the Supreme Court
justice was actually a Confederate
veteran who was crying with joy that now
his country was at war in a war that he
could support there's a lot of bottled
up fury and a lot of us that needs a
place to go and a well-orchestrated war
can sort of provide a vent for that you
know what was driving these vigilantes
who you know tarred and feathered draft
resisters what was driving the when when
American soldiers went to France to
fight in this war the US Army had a
problem unlike any other army and the
First World War had which was that they
had a problem of what they called
soldiers deserting to the front people
who were assigned to rear areas as most
soldiers are in most wars because you
have long supply lines and you know
warehouses and ships to be unloaded and
so on would grab a gun and run away to
the front because they wanted to kill
Germans where does that kind of furious
enthusiasm come from I'm not sure but I
think there are there's a
vast potential of it at all times and
places and effective demagogues know how
to speak to it and unleash it hi thanks
for speaking my question comes both from
the title of your book and from the
earlier question about the NRA
the cloud that's over all of our heads
in this dark time is climate change yes
and this may be an unfair question
haven't read the book but the lessons
from past shed any light on how we make
faster progress against a problem like
climate change we're like your common
with the NRA it's really gonna need a
Bottoms Up grassroots revolt of sorts
but so far on climate change it's not
happening it's not happening fast enough
I don't wonder if there any lessons that
you might comment in that area it's a
tough one because it is the big problem
facing off facing us all overwhelming in
its consequences and it's hard to think
of another time in history when the most
powerful person in the most powerful
country in the world was in flat
outright denial of the the major major
problem of the day I think part of it is
a question of finding ways to speak
about this which will resonate with
people I don't know what the answer is
on that but I'll just tell you an
interesting story the the woman who
asked a question a moment ago said she
was reading my book about the
anti-slavery movement bury the chains
and this was a movement where as I said
it was born in England with astonishing
swiftness it took off and in the space
of about half a dozen years you had
400,000 people in Britain which was more
people than were eligible to vote at
that time signing petitions to
Parliament against the slave trade
300,000 people refusing to eat slave
grown sugar from the Caribbean and this
popular movement remained in force and
managed to get the British slave trade
stopped after 20 years of organizing and
then end slavery in the British Empire
25 years before it was ended here in the
United States now it's and I think they
did it through devising new means of
organizing new means of dramatizing
their message I don't know exactly what
the analogous ones are today for climate
change but that's one of the reasons why
I like looking at history because
sometimes you can see the lessons a
little more clearly when you're looking
way back in time one of the things they
found for example was this that up to
the late 1780s there had been a certain
amount of debate in the press and in
political pamphlets and so on and
occasionally on the floor of Parliament
about slavery and the slave trade but it
had all been carried on in terms of
biblical argument this was a very
religious age and of course in the Bible
you can find arguments for and against
slavery the way you can find arguments
for and against almost anything else
what these folks discovered was the
enormous power of eyewitness testimony
that if you could find people who had
worked on slave plantations freed slave
who came to England and was willing to
tell his story a former slave ship
captain who repented of what he'd done
tell his story you know these books and
pamphlets had wide circulation far more
than before so they discovered new ways
of telling the story
for the first few years after that book
was published whenever somebody would
ask me to come and speak about it
somewhere it was usually you know a
college course on slavery in the slave
trade or an African history course or
something like that the last half dozen
times I've been asked to speak about
this book it's all from groups working
on climate change Sierra Club three
fifty.org Union of Concerned Scientists
a religious group just gave a talk a
couple of weeks ago to another group
they're trying to figure out and we all
need to figure out what are the
analogous new ways of speaking that we
need to adopt in order to get through to
people on the urgency of the danger that
we're facing there I don't know what
they are but I think it behooves us all
to be trying to figure that one out
that's the big one sure okay
[Applause]
you